# Publications
NoBIAS Publications for Open Source Access 

## Quantile Encoder: Tackling High Cardinality Categorical Features in Regression Problems
#### by _Carlos Mougan, David Masip, Jordi Nin, Oriol Pujol_ 
#### (International Conference on Modeling Decisions for Artificial Intelligence 2021)
Regression problems have been widely studied in machine learning literature resulting in a plethora of regression models and performance measures. However, there are few techniques specially dedicated to solve the problem of how to incorporate categorical features to regression problems. Usually, categorical feature encoders are general enough to cover both classification and regression problems. This lack of specificity results in underperforming regression models. In this paper, we provide an in-depth analysis of how to tackle high cardinality categorical features with the quantile. Our proposal outperforms state-of-the-encoders, including the traditional statistical mean target encoder, when considering the Mean Absolute Error, especially in the presence of long-tailed or skewed distributions. Besides, to deal with possible overfitting when there are categories with small support, our encoder benefits from additive smoothing. Finally, we describe how to expand the encoded values by creating a set of features with different quantiles. This expanded encoder provides a more informative output about the categorical feature in question, further boosting the performance of the regression model.\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/mougan2021quantile.pdf) 

## Logic programming for XAI: A technical perspective
#### by _Laura State_ 
#### (1st Workshop on Machine Ethics and Explainability - The Role of Logic Programming, 2021)
Our world is increasingly shaped by Artificial Intelligence systems, from search engines over automated hiring algorithms to self-driving cars. Being also used in high-stake decisions, their impact on the life of individuals is huge. Thus it becomes exceedingly important to sceptically review their limitations. One alarming problem is their uptake and reinforcement of existing social biases, as found in many different domains (criminal justice, facial recognition, credit scoring etc). It is complemented by the inherent opaqueness of the most accurate AI systems, making it impossible to understand details of their internal workings. The field of Explainable Artificial Intelligence is trying to address these problems. However, there are several challenges in the field, and we will start this work by pointing them out. We put forward a set of technical pathways, drawing from Logic Programming. Specifically, we propose using Constraint Logic Programming to construct explanations that incorporate prior knowledge, as well as Meta-Reasoning to track model and explanation changes over time.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/state2021logic.pdf)

## Desiderata for Explainable AI in statistical production systems of the European Central Bank
#### by _Carlos Mougan, Georgios Kanellos, Thomas Gottron_ 
#### (Workshop on bias and fairness in AI at ECML PKDD 2021)
Explainable AI constitutes a fundamental step towards establishing fairness and addressing bias in algorithmic decision-making. Despite the large body of work on the topic, the benefit of solutions is mostly evaluated from a conceptual or theoretical point of view and the usefulness for real-world use cases remains uncertain. In this work, we aim to state clear user-centric desiderata for explainable AI reflecting common explainability needs experienced in statistical production systems of the European Central Bank. We link the desiderata to archetypical user roles and give examples of techniques and methods which can be used to address the user’s needs. To this end, we provide two concrete use cases from the domain of statistical data production in central banks: the detection of outliers in the Centralised Securities Database and the data-driven identification of data quality checks for the Supervisory Banking data system.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/mougan2021desiderata.pdf)

## Measuring Shifts in Attitudes Towards COVID-19 Measures in Belgium
#### by _Kristen Scott, Pieter Delobelle, Bettina Berendt_ 
#### (Computational Linguistics in the Netherlands Journal, Vol. 11, 2021)
With the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent measures in full swing, people voiced their opinions of these measures on social media. Although it remains an open problem to correctly interpret these voices and translate this to public policy, we work towards this by tracking support for corona-related measures in Belgium, a densely-populated trilingual country in Western Europe. To this end, we classify seven months’ worth of Belgian COVID-related tweets using multilingual BERT and a manually labeled training set. The tweets are classified by which measure they refer to as well as by their stated opinion towards the curfew measure, for which we introduce a custom classification scheme (too strict, ok, too loose). Using this classification, we examine the change in topics discussed and views expressed over time and in reference to dates of related events such as the implementation of new measures or COVID-19 related announcements in the media. With these promising results, our contributions include (i) multiple multilingual BERT models trained on manually labeled data accompanied by (ii) historical analysis of the support for the curfew measure on Twitter and (iii) a thorough analysis of limitations and risks, together with best practices and a reference code book.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/scott2021measuring.pdf)

## A survey on bias in visual datasets
#### by _Simone Fabbrizzi, Symeon Papadopoulos, Eirini Ntoutsi, Ioannis Kompatsiaris_ 
#### (Computer Vision and Image Understanding, Volume 223, 2022)
Computer Vision (CV) has achieved remarkable results, outperforming humans in several tasks. Nonetheless, it may result in significant discrimination if not handled properly. Indeed, CV systems highly depend on training datasets and can learn and amplify biases that such datasets may carry. Thus, the problem of understanding and discovering bias in visual datasets is of utmost importance; yet, it has not been studied in a systematic way to date. Hence, this work aims to: (i) describe the different kinds of bias that may manifest in visual datasets; (ii) review the literature on methods for bias discovery and quantification in visual datasets; (iii) discuss existing attempts to collect visual datasets in a bias-aware manner. A key conclusion of our study is that the problem of bias discovery and quantification in visual datasets is still open, and there is room for improvement in terms of both methods and the range of biases that can be addressed. Moreover, there is no such thing as a bias-free dataset, so scientists and practitioners must become aware of the biases in their datasets and make them explicit. To this end, we propose a checklist to spot different types of bias during visual dataset collection.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/fabbrizzi2022survey.pdf)

## Introducing explainable supervised machine learning into interactive feedback loops for statistical production system
#### by _Carlos Mougan, George Kanellos, Johannes Micheler, Jose Martinez, Thomas Gottron_ 
#### (IFC-Bank of Italy Workshop on “Data Science in Central Banking: Applications and tools” 2022)
Statistical production systems cover multiple steps from the collection, aggregation, and integration of data to tasks like data quality assurance and dissemination. While the context of data quality assurance is one of the most promising fields for applying machine learning, the lack of curated and labeled training data is often a limiting factor.
The statistical production system for the Centralised Securities Database features an interactive feedback loop between data collected by the European Central Bank and data quality assurance performed by data quality managers at National Central Banks. The quality assurance feedback loop is based on a set of rule-based checks for raising exceptions, upon which the user either confirms the data or corrects an actual error.
In this paper we use the information received from this feedback loop to optimize the exceptions presented to the National Central Banks thereby improving the quality of exceptions generated and the time consumed on the system by the users authenticating those exceptions. For this approach we make use of explainable supervised machine learning to (a) identify the types of exceptions and (b) to prioritize which exceptions are more likely to require an intervention or correction by the NCBs. Furthermore, we provide an explainable AI taxonomy aiming to identify the different explainable AI needs that arose during the project.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/mougan2022introducing.pdf)

## Semantic Web technologies and bias in artificial intelligence: A systematic literature review
#### by _Paula Reyero Lobo, Enrico Daga, Harith Alani, Miriam Fernandez_ 
#### (Semantic Web, Volume 14, Number 4, 2023)
Bias in Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a critical and timely issue due to its sociological, economic and legal impact, as decisions made by biased algorithms could lead to unfair treatment of specific individuals or groups. Multiple surveys have emerged to provide a multidisciplinary view of bias or to review bias in specific areas such as social sciences, business research, criminal justice, or data mining. Given the ability of Semantic Web (SW) technologies to support multiple AI systems, we review the extent to which semantics can be a “tool” to address bias in different algorithmic scenarios. We provide an in-depth categorisation and analysis of bias assessment, representation, and mitigation approaches that use SW technologies. We discuss their potential in dealing with issues such as representing disparities of specific demographics or reducing data drifts, sparsity, and missing values. We find research works on AI bias that apply semantics mainly in information retrieval, recommendation and natural language processing applications and argue through multiple use cases that semantics can help deal with technical, sociological, and psychological challenges.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/lobo2023semantic.pdf)

## Time to Question if We Should: Data-Driven and Algorithmic Tools in Public Employment Services
#### by _Pieter Delobelle, Kristen M. Scott, Sonja Mei Wang, Milagros Miceli, David Hartmann, Tianling Yang, Elena Murasso, Karolina Sztandar-Sztanderska, Bettina Berendt_ 
#### (International workshop on Fair, Effective And Sustainable Talent management using data science 2022)
Algorithmic and data-driven systems have been introduced to assist Public Employment Services (PES) in various countries. However , their deployment has been heavily criticized. This paper is based on a workshop organized by a distributed team of researchers in AI ethics and adjacent fields, which brought together academics, system developers , representatives from the public sector, civil-society organizations, and participants from industry. We report on the workshop and analyze three salient discussion topics, organized around our research questions: (1) the challenge of representing individuals with data, (2) the role of job counsellors and data-driven systems in PES, and (3) questions around the interactions between job seeker, counsellor, and system. Finally, we consider lessons learned from the workshop and describe plans aiming at involving a multiplicity of stakeholders in a co-design process.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/delobelle2022time.pdf)

## Data Privacy Issues in Big Biomedical Data
#### by _Maria-Esther Vidal, Mayra Russo, Philipp Rohde_ 
#### (Artificial Intelligence - Law and practice of automated and autonomous systems 2021)
The amount of available Big data has grown drastically in the last decade, and a faster growth rate is expected in the coming years. Specifically, various biomedical domain methods, e.g., liquid biopsies, medical images, and genome sequencing, produce large volumes of data from where new biomarkers, or biological characteristics and medical signs, can uncover the incidence of a disease. Clinicians are faced with several challenges when analyzing biomedical data sources during diagnosis and treatment prescriptions. Biomedical data are presented in countless formats such as medical records, images, or genome data, that have to then be combined for optimal therapy decisions. Lastly, different regulation for enforcing data protection and privacy may hinder free access to biomedical data. This chapter addresses challenges present during the management of big biomedical data and presents a data-driven framework that resorts to ontologies to describe the main characteristics of data sources whose access is regulated by different data access regulations. The Privacy Ontology is defined as a formalism for representing the various entities that play a relevant role in the collection, anonymisation, integration, processing, and distribution of big biomedical data. As proof of concept, we illustrate the expressiveness of the proposed approach in the context of the European Union funded project iASiS, which aims at transforming big data into actionable knowledge to pave the way for personalised medicine and individualised treatments.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/vidal2021data.pdf)

## Explainability in Practice: Estimating Electrification Rates from Mobile Phone Data in Senegal
#### by _Laura State, Hadrien Salat, Stefania Rubrichi, Zbigniew Smoreda_ 
#### (World Conference on eXplainable Artificial Intelligence, xAI 2023)
Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) provides explanations for not interpretable machine learning (ML) models. While many technical approaches exist, there is a lack of validation of these techniques on real-world datasets. In this work, we present a use-case of XAI: an ML model which is trained to estimate electrification rates based on mobile phone data in Senegal. The data originate from the Data for Development challenge by Orange in 2014/15. We apply two model-agnostic, local explanation techniques and find that while the model can be verified, it is biased with respect to the population density. We conclude our paper by pointing to the two main challenges we encountered during our work: data processing and model design that might be restricted by currently available XAI methods, and the importance of domain knowledge to interpret explanations.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/state2023explainability.pdf)

## Predicting and explaining employee turnover intention
#### by _Matilde Lazzari, Jose M. Alvarez, Salvatore Ruggieri_ 
#### (International Journal of Data Science and Analytics, Volume 14, 2022)
Turnover intention is an employee’s reported willingness to leave her organization within a given period of time and is often used for studying actual employee turnover. Since employee turnover can have a detrimental impact on business and the labor market at large, it is important to understand the determinants of such a choice. We describe and analyze a unique European-wide survey on employee turnover intention. A few baselines and state-of-the-art classification models are compared as per predictive performances. Logistic regression and LightGBM rank as the top two performing models. We investigate on the importance of the predictive features for these two models, as a means to rank the determinants of turnover intention. Further, we overcome the traditional correlation-based analysis of turnover intention by a novel causality-based approach to support potential policy interventions.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/lazzari2022predicting.pdf)

## Fairness Implications of Encoding Protected Categorical Attributes
#### by _Carlos Mougan, Jose Manuel Alvarez, Salvatore Ruggieri, Steffen Staab_ 
#### (AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society 2023)
Past research has demonstrated that the explicit use of protected attributes in machine learning can improve both performance and fairness. Many machine learning algorithms, however, cannot directly process categorical attributes, such as country of birth or ethnicity. Because protected attributes frequently are categorical, they must be encoded as features that can be input to a chosen machine learning algorithm, e.g. support vector machines, gradient boosting decision trees or linear models. Thereby, encoding methods influence how and what the machine learning algorithm will learn, affecting model performance and fairness. This work compares the accuracy and fairness implications of the two most well-known encoding methods: one-hot encoding and target encoding. We distinguish between two types of induced bias that may arise from these encoding methods and may lead to unfair models. The first type, irreducible bias, is due to direct group category discrimination and the second type, reducible bias, is due to the large variance in statistically underrepresented groups. We investigate the interaction between categorical encodings and target encoding regularization methods that reduce unfairness. Furthermore, we consider the problem of intersectional unfairness that may arise when machine learning best practices improve performance measures by encoding several categorical attributes into a high-cardinality feature.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/mougan2023fairness.pdf)

## Policy advice and best practices on bias and fairness in AI
#### by _Jose M. Alvarez, Alejandra Bringas Colmenarejo, Alaa Elobaid, Simone Fabbrizzi, Miriam Fahimi, Antonio Ferrara, Siamak Ghodsi, Carlos Mougan, Ioanna Papageorgiou, Paula Reyero, Mayra Russo, Kristen M. Scott, Laura State, Xuan Zhao, Salvatore Ruggieri_ 
#### (Ethics and Information Technology, Volume 26, Number 31, 2024)
The literature addressing bias and fairness in AI models (fair-AI) is growing at a fast pace, making it difficult for novel researchers and practitioners to have a bird’s-eye view picture of the field. In particular, many policy initiatives, standards, and best practices in fair-AI have been proposed for setting principles, procedures, and knowledge bases to guide and operationalize the management of bias and fairness. The first objective of this paper is to concisely survey the state-of-the-art of fair-AI methods and resources, and the main policies on bias in AI, with the aim of providing such a bird’s-eye guidance for both researchers and practitioners. The second objective of the paper is to contribute to the policy advice and best practices state-of-the-art by leveraging from the results of the NoBIAS research project. We present and discuss a few relevant topics organized around the NoBIAS architecture, which is made up of a Legal Layer, focusing on the European Union context, and a Bias Management Layer, focusing on understanding, mitigating, and accounting for bias.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/alvarez2024policy.pdf)

## Can We Trust Fair-AI?
#### by _Salvatore Ruggieri, Jose M. Alvarez, Andrea Pugnana, Laura State, Franco Turini_ 
#### (Senior Member Presentation: Summary Papers, AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 2023)
There is a fast-growing literature in addressing the fairness of AI models (fair-AI), with a continuous stream of new conceptual frameworks, methods, and tools. How much can we trust them? How much do they actually impact society? We take a critical focus on fair-AI and survey issues, simplifications, and mistakes that researchers and practitioners often underestimate, which in turn can undermine the trust on fair-AI and limit its contribution to society. In particular, we discuss the hyper-focus on fairness metrics and on optimizing their average performances. We instantiate this observation by discussing the Yule's effect of fair-AI tools: being fair on average does not imply being fair in contexts that matter. We conclude that the use of fair-AI methods should be complemented with the design, development, and verification practices that are commonly summarized under the umbrella of trustworthy AI.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/ruggieri2023can.pdf)

## Domain Adaptive Decision Trees: Implications for Accuracy and Fairness
#### by _Jose M. Alvarez, Kristen M. Scott, Bettina Berendt, Salvatore Ruggieri_ 
#### (ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency 2023)
In uses of pre-trained machine learning models, it is a known issue that the target population in which the model is being deployed may not have been reflected in the source population with which the model was trained. This can result in a biased model when deployed, leading to a reduction in model performance. One risk is that, as the population changes, certain demographic groups will be under-served or otherwise disadvantaged by the model, even as they become more represented in the target population. The field of domain adaptation proposes techniques for a situation where label data for the target population does not exist, but some information about the target distribution does exist. In this paper we contribute to the domain adaptation literature by introducing domain-adaptive decision trees (DADT). We focus on decision trees given their growing popularity due to their interpretability and performance relative to other more complex models. With DADT we aim to improve the accuracy of models trained in a source domain (or training data) that differs from the target domain (or test data). We propose an in-processing step that adjusts the information gain split criterion with outside information corresponding to the distribution of the target population. We demonstrate DADT on real data and find that it improves accuracy over a standard decision tree when testing in a shifted target population. We also study the change in fairness under demographic parity and equal opportunity. Results show an improvement in fairness with the use of DADT.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/alvarez2023domain.pdf)

## Counterfactual Situation Testing: Uncovering Discrimination under Fairness given the Difference
#### by _Salvatore Ruggieri, Jose Manuel Alvarez_ 
#### (ACM Conference on Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimization 2023)
We present counterfactual situation testing (CST), a causal data mining framework for detecting discrimination in classifiers. CST aims to answer in an actionable and meaningful way the intuitive question "what would have been the model outcome had the individual, or complainant, been of a different protected status?" It extends the legally-grounded situation testing of Thanh et al. (2011) by operationalizing the notion of fairness given the difference using counterfactual reasoning. For any complainant, we find and compare similar protected and non-protected instances in the dataset used by the classifier to construct a control and test group, where a difference between the decision outcomes of the two groups implies potential individual discrimination. Unlike situation testing, which builds both groups around the complainant, we build the test group on the complainant's counterfactual generated using causal knowledge. The counterfactual is intended to reflect how the protected attribute when changed affects the seemingly neutral attributes used by the classifier, which is taken for granted in many frameworks for discrimination. Under CST, we compare similar individuals within each group but dissimilar individuals across both groups due to the possible difference between the complainant and its counterfactual. Evaluating our framework on two classification scenarios, we show that it uncovers a greater number of cases than situation testing, even when the classifier satisfies the counterfactual fairness condition of Kusner et al. (2017).
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/alvarez2023counterfactual.pdf)

## Causal Fairness-Guided Dataset Reweighting using Neural Networks
#### by _Xuan Zhao, Klaus Broelemann, Salvatore Ruggieri, Gjergji Kasneci_ 
#### (IEEE International Conference on Big Data 2023)
The importance of achieving fairness in machine learning models cannot be overstated. Recent research has pointed out that fairness should be examined from a causal perspective, and several fairness notions based on the on Pearl’s causal framework have been proposed. In this paper, we construct a reweighting scheme of datasets to address causal fairness. Our approach aims at mitigating bias by considering the causal relationships among variables and incorporating them into the reweighting process. The proposed method adopts two neural networks, whose structures are intentionally used to reflect the structures of a causal graph and of an interventional graph. The two neural networks can approximate the causal model of the data, and the causal model of interventions. Furthermore, reweighting guided by a discriminator is applied to achieve various fairness notions. Experiments on real-world datasets show that our method can achieve causal fairness on the data while remaining close to the original data for downstream tasks.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/zhao2023causal.pdf)

## Reason to Explain: Interactive Contrastive Explanations (REASONX)
#### by _Laura State, Salvatore Ruggieri, Franco Turini_ 
#### (World Conference on eXplainable Artificial Intelligence 2023)
Many high-performing machine learning models are not interpretable. As they are increasingly used in decision scenarios that can critically affect individuals, it is necessary to develop tools to better understand their outputs. Popular explanation methods include contrastive explanations. However, they suffer several shortcomings, among others an insufficient incorporation of background knowledge, and a lack of interactivity. While (dialogue-like) interactivity is important to better communicate an explanation, background knowledge has the potential to significantly improve their quality, e.g., by adapting the explanation to the needs of the end-user. To close this gap, we present REASONX, an explanation tool based on Constraint Logic Programming (CLP). REASONX provides interactive contrastive explanations that can be augmented by background knowledge, and allows to operate under a setting of under-specified information, leading to increased flexibility in the provided explanations. REASONX computes factual and constrative decision rules, as well as closest constrative examples. It provides explanations for decision trees, which can be the ML models under analysis, or global/local surrogate models of any ML model. While the core part of REASONX is built on CLP, we also provide a program layer that allows to compute the explanations via Python, making the tool accessible to a wider audience. We illustrate the capability of REASONX on a synthetic data set, and on a a well-developed example in the credit domain. In both cases, we can show how REASONX can be flexibly used and tailored to the needs of the user.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/state2023reason.pdf)

## Explaining short text classification with diverse synthetic exemplars and counter-exemplars
#### by _Orestis Lampridis, Laura State, Riccardo Guidotti, Salvatore Ruggieri_ 
#### (Machine Learning, Volume 112, Issue 11, 2022)
We present xspells, a model-agnostic local approach for explaining the decisions of black box models in classification of short texts. The explanations provided consist of a set of exemplar sentences and a set of counter-exemplar sentences. The former are examples classified by the black box with the same label as the text to explain. The latter are examples classified with a different label (a form of counter-factuals). Both are close in meaning to the text to explain, and both are meaningful sentences – albeit they are synthetically generated. xspells generates neighbors of the text to explain in a latent space using Variational Autoencoders for encoding text and decoding latent instances. A decision tree is learned from randomly generated neighbors, and used to drive the selection of the exemplars and counter-exemplars. Moreover, diversity of counter-exemplars is modeled as an optimization problem, solved by a greedy algorithm with theoretical guarantee. We report experiments on three datasets showing that xspells outperforms the well-known lime method in terms of quality of explanations, fidelity, diversity, and usefulness, and that is comparable to it in terms of stability.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/lampridis2022explaining.pdf)

## Declarative Reasoning on Explanations Using Constraint Logic Programming
#### by _Laura State, Salvatore Ruggieri, Franco Turini_ 
#### (European Conference on Logics in Artificial Intelligence 2023)
Explaining opaque Machine Learning (ML) models is an increasingly relevant problem. Current explanation in AI (XAI) methods suffer several shortcomings, among others an insufficient incorporation of background knowledge, and a lack of abstraction and interactivity with the user. We propose REASONX, an explanation method based on Constraint Logic Programming (CLP). REASONX can provide declarative, interactive explanations for decision trees, which can be the ML models under analysis or global/local surrogate models of any black-box model. Users can express background or common sense knowledge using linear constraints and MILP optimization over features of factual and contrastive instances, and interact with the answer constraints at different levels of abstraction through constraint projection. We present here the architecture of REASONX, which consists of a Python layer, closer to the user, and a CLP layer. REASONX's core execution engine is a Prolog meta-program with declarative semantics in terms of logic theories.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/state2023declarative.pdf)

## The Explanation Dialogues: Understanding How Legal Experts Reason About XAI Methods
#### by _Laura State, Alejandra Bringas Colmenarejo, Andrea Beretta, Salvatore Ruggieri, Franco Turini1 and Stephanie Law_
#### (European Workshop on Algorithmic Fairness 2023)
The Explanation Dialogues project is an expert focus study that aims to uncover expectations, reasoning, and rules of legal experts and practitioners towards explainable artificial intelligence (XAI). We examine legal perceptions and disputes that arise in a fictional scenario that resembles a daily life situation - a bank’s use of an automated decision-making (ADM) system to decide on credit allocation to individuals. Through this simulation, the study aims to provide insights into the legal value and validity of explanations of ADMs, identify potential gaps and issues that may arise in the context of compliance with European legislation, and provide guidance on how to address these shortcomings.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/state2023explanation.pdf)

## Careful Explanations: A Feminist Perspective on XAI
#### by _Laura State, Miriam Fahimi_ 
#### (European Workshop on Algorithmic Fairness 2023)
Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) is a rapidly growing research field that has received a lot of attention during the last few years. An important goal of the field is to use its methods to detect (social) bias and discrimination. Despite these positive intentions, aspects of XAI can be in conflict with feminist approaches and values. Therefore, our conceptual contribution brings forward both a careful assessment of current XAI methods, as well as visions for carefully doing XAI from a feminist perspective. We conclude with a discussion on the possibilities for caring XAI, and the challenges that might lie along the way.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/state2023careful.pdf)

## Constructing Meaningful Explanations: Logic-based Approaches
#### by _Laura State_ 
#### (AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society 2022)
Machine learning (ML) models are ubiquitous: we encounter them when using a search engine, behind online text translation, etc. However, these models have to be used with care, as they are susceptible to social biases. Further, most ML models are inherently opaque, another obstacle to understand and verify them.
Being concerned with meaningful explanations, this work is putting forward two research paths: constructing counterfactual explanations with prior knowledge, and reasoning over explanations and time. Prior knowledge has the potential to significantly increase explanation quality, whereas time dimensions are necessary to track changes in ML models and explanations. The proposal builds on (constraint) logic programming and meta-reasoning. While situated in the computer sciences, it strives to reflect the interdisciplinary character of the field of eXplainable Artificial Intelligence.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/state2022constructing.pdf)

## Causal Perception
#### by _Jose M. Alvarez, Salvatore Ruggieri_ 
#### (ArXiv Preprint 2024)
Perception occurs when two individuals interpret the same information differently. Despite being a known phenomenon with implications for bias in decision-making, as individual experience determines interpretation, perception remains largely overlooked in machine learning (ML) research. Modern decision flows, whether partially or fully automated, involve human experts interacting with ML applications. How might we then, e.g., account for two experts that interpret differently a deferred instance or an explanation from a ML model? To account for perception, we first need to formulate it. In this work, we define perception under causal reasoning using structural causal models (SCM). Our framework formalizes individual experience as additional causal knowledge that comes with and is used by a human expert (read, decision maker). We present two kinds of causal perception, unfaithful and inconsistent, based on the SCM properties of faithfulness and consistency. Further, we motivate the importance of perception within fairness problems. We illustrate our framework through a series of decision flow examples involving ML applications and human experts.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/alvarez2024causal.pdf)

## A Causal Framework for Evaluating Deferring Systems
#### by _Filippo Palomba, Andrea Pugnana, José Manuel Alvarez, Salvatore Ruggieri_ 
#### (ArXiv Preprint 2024)
Deferring systems extend supervised Machine Learning (ML) models with the possibility to defer predictions to human experts. However, evaluating the impact of a deferring strategy on system accuracy is still an overlooked area. This paper fills this gap by evaluating deferring systems through a causal lens. We link the potential outcomes framework for causal inference with deferring systems. This allows us to identify the causal impact of the deferring strategy on predictive accuracy. We distinguish two scenarios. In the first one, we can access both the human and the ML model predictions for the deferred instances. In such a case, we can identify the individual causal effects for deferred instances and aggregates of them. In the second scenario, only human predictions are available for the deferred instances. In this case, we can resort to regression discontinuity design to estimate a local causal effect. We empirically evaluate our approach on synthetic and real datasets for seven deferring systems from the literature.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/palomba2024causal.pdf)

## Uncovering Algorithmic Discrimination: An Opportunity to Revisit the Comparator
#### by _Jose M. Alvarez, Salvatore Ruggieri_ 
#### (ArXiv Preprint 2024)
Causal reasoning, in particular, counterfactual reasoning plays a central role in testing for discrimination. Counterfactual reasoning materializes when testing for discrimination, what is known as the counterfactual model of discrimination, when we compare the discrimination comparator with the discrimination complainant, where the comparator is a similar (or similarly situated) profile to that of the complainant used for testing the discrimination claim of the complainant. In this paper, we revisit the comparator by presenting two kinds of comparators based on the sort of causal intervention we want to represent. We present the ceteris paribus and the mutatis mutandis comparator, where the former is the standard and the latter is a new kind of comparator. We argue for the use of the mutatis mutandis comparator, which is built on the fairness given the difference notion, for testing future algorithmic discrimination cases.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/alvarez2024uncovering.pdf)

## Enhancing Fairness through Reweighting: A Path to Attain the Sufficiency Rule
#### by _Xuan Zhao, Klaus Broelemann, Salvatore Ruggieri, Gjergji Kasneci_
#### (European Conference on Artificial Intelligence 2024)
We introduce an innovative approach to enhancing the empirical risk minimization (ERM) process in model training through a refined reweighting scheme of the training data to enhance fairness. This scheme aims to uphold the sufficiency rule in fairness by ensuring that optimal predictors maintain consistency across diverse sub-groups. We employ a bilevel formulation to address this challenge, wherein we explore sample reweighting strategies. Unlike conventional methods that hinge on model size, our formulation bases generalization complexity on the space of sample weights. We discretize the weights to improve training speed. Empirical validation of our method showcases its effectiveness and robustness, revealing a consistent improvement in the balance between prediction performance and fairness metrics across various experiments.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/zhao2024enhancing.pdf)

## Link recommendations: Their impact on network structure and minorities
#### by _Antonio Ferrara, Lisette Espín-Noboa, Fariba Karimi, Claudia Wagner_ 
#### (ACM Web Science Conference 2022)
Network-based people recommendation algorithms are widely employed on the Web to suggest new connections in social media or professional platforms. While such recommendations bring people together, the feedback loop between the algorithms and the changes in network structure may exacerbate social biases. These biases include rich-get-richer effects, filter bubbles, and polarization. However, social networks are diverse complex systems and recommendations may affect them differently, depending on their structural properties. In this work, we explore five people recommendation algorithms by systematically applying them over time to different synthetic networks. In particular, we measure to what extent these recommendations change the structure of bi-populated networks and show how these changes affect the minority group. Our systematic experimentation helps to better understand when link recommendation algorithms are beneficial or harmful to minority groups in social networks. In particular, our findings suggest that, while all algorithms tend to close triangles and increase cohesion, all algorithms except Node2Vec are prone to favor and suggest nodes with high in-degree. Furthermore, we found that, especially when both classes are heterophilic, recommendation algorithms can reduce the visibility of minorities.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/ferrara2022link.pdf)

## Algorithmic Tools in Public Employment Services: Towards a Jobseeker-Centric Perspective
#### by _Kristen M. Scott, Sonja Mei Wang, Milagros Miceli, Pieter Delobelle, Karolina Sztandar-Sztanderska, Bettina Berendt_ 
#### (ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency 2022)
Data-driven and algorithmic systems have been introduced to support Public Employment Services (PES) throughout the world. Their deployment has sparked public controversy and, as a consequence, some of these systems have been removed from use or their role was reduced. Yet the implementation of similar systems continues. In this paper, we use a participatory approach to determine a course forward for research and development in this area. We draw attention to the needs and expectations of people directly affected by these systems, i.e., jobseekers. Our investigation comprises two workshops: the first a fact-finding workshop with academics, system developers, the public sector, and civil-society organizations, the second a co-design workshop with 13 unemployed migrants to Germany. Based on the discussion in the fact-finding workshop we identified challenges of existing PES (algorithmic) systems. From the co-design workshop we identified our participants’ needs and desires when contacting PES: the need for human contact, the expectation to receive genuine orientation, and the desire to be seen as a whole human being. We map these expectations to three design considerations for data-driven and algorithmic systems for PES: the importance of interpersonal interaction, jobseeker assessment as direction, and the challenge of mitigating misrepresentation. Finally, we argue that the limitations and risks of current systems cannot be addressed through minor adjustments but require a more fundamental change to the role of PES.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/scott2022algorithmic.pdf)

## Bias in Hate Speech and Toxicity Detection
#### by _Paula Reyero Lobo_ 
#### (AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society 2022)
Many Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems rely on finding patterns in large datasets, which are prone to bias and exacerbate existing segregation and inequalities of marginalised communities. Due to their socio-technical impact, bias in AI has become a pressing issue. In this work, we investigate discrimination prevention methods on the assumption that disparities of specific populations in the training samples are reproduced or even amplified in the AI system outcomes. We aim to identify the information from vulnerable groups in the training data, uncover potential inequalities in how data capture these groups and provide additional information about them to alleviate inequalities, e.g., stereotypical and generalised views that lead to learning discriminatory associations. We develop data preprocessing techniques in automated moderation (AI systems to flag or filter online abuse) due to its substantial social implications and existing challenges common to many AI applications.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/lobo2022bias.pdf)

## Explanation Shift: Detecting distribution shifts on tabular data via the explanation space
#### by _Carlos Mougan, Klaus Broelemann, Gjergji Kasneci, Thanassis Tiropanis, Steffen Staab_ 
#### (Workshop on Distribution Shifts: Connecting Methods and Applications at the Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2022)
As input data distributions evolve, the predictive performance of machine learning models tends to deteriorate. In the past, predictive performance was considered the key indicator to monitor. However, explanation aspects have come to attention within the last years. In this work, we investigate how model predictive performance and model explanation characteristics are affected under distribution shifts and how these key indicators are related to each other for tabular data. We find that the modeling of explanation shifts can be a better indicator for the detection of predictive performance changes than state-of-the-art techniques based on representations of distribution shifts. We provide a mathematical analysis of different types of distribution shifts as well as synthetic experimental examples.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/mougan2022explanation.pdf)

## Fairness in Agreement With European Values: An Interdisciplinary Perspective on AI Regulation
#### by _Alejandra Bringas Colmenarejo, Luca Nannini, Alisa Rieger, Kristen M. Scott, Xuan Zhao, Gourab K. Patro, Gjergji Kasneci, Katharina Kinder-Kurlanda_ 
#### (AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society 2022)
With increasing digitalization, Artificial Intelligence (AI) is becoming ubiquitous. AI-based systems to identify, optimize, automate, and scale solutions to complex economic and societal problems are being proposed and implemented. This has motivated regulation efforts, including the Proposal of an EU AI Act. This interdisciplinary position paper considers various concerns surrounding fairness and discrimination in AI, and discusses how AI regulations address them, focusing on (but not limited to) the Proposal. We first look at AI and fairness through the lenses of law, (AI) industry, sociotechnology, and (moral) philosophy, and present various perspectives. Then, we map these perspectives along three axes of interests: (i) Standardization vs. Localization, (ii) Utilitarianism vs. Egalitarianism, and (iii) Consequential vs. Deontological ethics which leads us to identify a pattern of common arguments and tensions between these axes. Positioning the discussion within the axes of interest and with a focus on reconciling the key tensions, we identify and propose the roles AI Regulation should take to make the endeavor of the AI Act a success in terms of AI fairness concerns.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/colmenarejo2022fairness.pdf)

## Studying bias in visual features through the lens of optimal transport
#### by _Simone Fabbrizzi, Xuan Zhao, Emmanouil Krasanakis, Symeon Papadopoulos, Eirini Ntoutsi_ 
#### (Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, Volume 38, 2024)
Computer vision systems are employed in a variety of high-impact applications. However, making them trustworthy requires methods for the detection of potential biases in their training data, before models learn to harm already disadvantaged groups in downstream applications. Image data are typically represented via extracted features, which can be hand-crafted or pre-trained neural network embeddings. In this work, we introduce a framework for bias discovery given such features that is based on optimal transport theory; it uses the (quadratic) Wasserstein distance to quantify disparity between the feature distributions of two demographic groups (e.g., women vs men). In this context, we show that the Kantorovich potentials of the images, which are a byproduct of computing the Wasserstein distance and act as “transportation prices", can serve as bias scores by indicating which images might exhibit distinct biased characteristics. We thus introduce a visual dataset exploration pipeline that helps auditors identify common characteristics across high- or low-scored images as potential sources of bias. We conduct a case study to identify prospective gender biases and demonstrate theoretically-derived properties with experiments on the CelebA and Biased MNIST datasets.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/fabbrizzi2024studying.pdf)

## Beyond Demographic Parity: Redefining Equal Treatment
#### by _Carlos Mougan, Laura State, Antonio Ferrara, Salvatore Ruggieri, Steffen Staab_ 
#### (ArXiv Preprint 2023)
Liberalism-oriented political philosophy reasons that all individuals should be treated equally independently of their protected characteristics. Related work in machine learning has translated the concept of \emph{equal treatment} into terms of \emph{equal outcome} and measured it as \emph{demographic parity} (also called \emph{statistical parity}). Our analysis reveals that the two concepts of equal outcome and equal treatment diverge; therefore, demographic parity does not faithfully represent the notion of \emph{equal treatment}. We propose a new formalization for equal treatment by (i) considering the influence of feature values on predictions, such as computed by Shapley values decomposing predictions across its features, (ii) defining distributions of explanations, and (iii) comparing explanation distributions between populations with different protected characteristics. We show the theoretical properties of our notion of equal treatment and devise a classifier two-sample test based on the AUC of an equal treatment inspector. We study our formalization of equal treatment on synthetic and natural data. We release \texttt{explanationspace}, an open-source Python package with methods and tutorials.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/mougan2023beyond.pdf)

## The Initial Screening Order Problem
#### by _Jose M. Alvarez, Antonio Mastropietro, Salvatore Ruggieri_ 
#### (ArXiv Preprint 2023)
We investigate the role of the initial screening order (ISO) in candidate screening tasks, such as employee hiring and academic admissions, in which a screener is tasked with selecting k candidates from a candidate pool. The ISO refers to the order in which the screener searches the candidate pool. Today, it is common for the ISO to be the product of an information access system, such as an online platform or a database query. The ISO has been largely overlooked in the literature, despite its potential impact on the optimality and fairness of the chosen k candidates, especially under a human screener. We define two problem formulations describing the search behavior of the screener under the ISO: the best-k, where the screener selects the k best candidates; and the good-k, where the screener selects the k first good-enough candidates. To study the impact of the ISO, we introduce a human-like screener and compare it to its algorithmic counterpart, where the human-like screener is conceived to be inconsistent over time due to fatigue. In particular, our analysis shows that the ISO, under a human-like screener solving for the good-k problem, hinders individual fairness despite meeting group level fairness, and hampers the optimality of the selected k candidates. This is due to position bias, where a candidate's evaluation is affected by its position within the ISO. We report extensive simulated experiments exploring the parameters of the best-k and good-k problems for the algorithmic and human-like screeners. The simulation framework is flexible enough to account for multiple screening settings, being an alternative to running real-world candidate screening procedures. This work is motivated by a real-world candidate screening problem studied in collaboration with an European company.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/alvarez2023initial.pdf)

## Supporting Online Toxicity Detection with Knowledge Graphs
#### by _Paula Reyero Lobo, Enrico Daga, Harith Alani_ 
#### (AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media 2022)
Due to the rise in toxic speech on social media and other online platforms, there is a growing need for systems that could automatically flag or filter such content. Various supervised machine learning approaches have been proposed, trained from manually-annotated toxic speech corpora. However, annotators sometimes struggle to judge or to agree on which text is toxic and which group is being targeted in a given text. This could be due to bias, subjectivity, or unfamiliarity with used terminology (e.g. domain language, slang). In this paper, we propose the use of a knowledge graph to help in better understanding such toxic speech annotation issues. Our empirical results show that 3% in a sample of 19k texts mention terms associated with frequently attacked gender and sexual orientation groups that were not correctly identified by the annotators.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/lobo2022toxicity.pdf)

## Counterfactual Explanation for Regression via Disentanglement in Latent Space
#### by _Xuan Zhao, Klaus Broelemann, Gjergji Kasneci_ 
#### (Workshop on Causal and Explainable Artificial Intelligence at the IEEE International Conference on Data Mining 2023)
Counterfactual Explanations (CEs) help address the question: How can the factors that influence the prediction of a predictive model be changed to achieve a more favorable outcome from a user's perspective? Thus, they bear the potential to guide the user's interaction with AI systems since they represent easy-to-understand explanations. To be applicable, CEs need to be realistic and actionable. In the literature, various methods have been proposed to generate CEs. However, the majority of research on CEs focuses on classification problems where questions like "What should I do to get my rejected loan approved?" are raised. In practice, answering questions like "What should I do to increase my salary?" are of a more regressive nature. In this paper, we introduce a novel method to generate CEs for a pre-trained regressor by first disentangling the label-relevant from the label-irrelevant dimensions in the latent space. CEs are then generated by combining the label-irrelevant dimensions and the predefined output. The intuition behind this approach is that the ideal counterfactual search should focus on the label-irrelevant characteristics of the input and suggest changes toward target-relevant characteristics. Searching in the latent space could help achieve this goal. We show that our method maintains the characteristics of the query sample during the counterfactual search. In various experiments, we demonstrate that the proposed method is competitive based on different quality measures on image and tabular datasets in regression problem settings. It efficiently returns results closer to the original data manifold compared to three state-of-the-art methods, which is essential for realistic high-dimensional machine learning applications. Our code will be made available as an open-source package upon the publication of this work.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/zhao2023counterfactual.pdf)

## Monitoring Model Deterioration with Explainable Uncertainty Estimation via Non-parametric Bootstrap
#### by _Carlos Mougan, Dan Saattrup Nielsen_ 
#### (Safe and Robust AI track at the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 2023)
Monitoring machine learning models once they are deployed is challenging. It is even more challenging to decide when to retrain models in real-case scenarios when labeled data is beyond reach, and monitoring performance metrics becomes unfeasible. In this work, we use non-parametric bootstrapped uncertainty estimates and SHAP values to provide explainable uncertainty estimation as a technique that aims to monitor the deterioration of machine learning models in deployment environments, as well as determine the source of model deterioration when target labels are not available. Classical methods are purely aimed at detecting distribution shift, which can lead to false positives in the sense that the model has not deteriorated despite a shift in the data distribution. To estimate model uncertainty we construct prediction intervals using a novel bootstrap method, which improves upon the work of Kumar & Srivastava (2012). We show that both our model deterioration detection system as well as our uncertainty estimation method achieve better performance than the current state-of-the-art. Finally, we use explainable AI techniques to gain an understanding of the drivers of model deterioration. We release an open source Python package, doubt, which implements our proposed methods, as well as the code used to reproduce our experiments.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/mougan2023monitoring.pdf)

## How to Data in Datathons
#### by _Carlos Mougan, Richard Plant, Clare Teng, Marya Bazzi, Alvaro Cabrejas-Egea, Ryan Sze-Yin Chan, David Salvador Jasin, Martin Stoffel, Kirstie Jane Whitaker, Jules Manser_ 
#### (Track on Datasets and Benchmark at the Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2023)
The rise of datathons, also known as data or data science hackathons, has provided a platform to collaborate, learn, and innovate in a short timeframe. Despite their significant potential benefits, organizations often struggle to effectively work with data due to a lack of clear guidelines and best practices for potential issues that might arise. Drawing on our own experiences and insights from organizing >80 datathon challenges with >60 partnership organizations since 2016, we provide guidelines and recommendations that serve as a resource for organizers to navigate the data-related complexities of datathons. We apply our proposed framework to 10 case studies.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/mougan2023data.pdf)

## Estimating Ground Truth in a Low-labelled Data Regime: A Study of Racism Detection in Spanish
#### by _Paula Reyero Lobo, Martino Mensio, Angel Pavon Perez, Vaclav Bayer, Joseph Kwarteng, Miriam Fernandez, Enrico Daga, Harith Alani_ 
#### (Workshop Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media 2022)
Obtaining reliable and quality training datasets is resourceintensive, especially in interpretation and human judgment tasks, such as racism detection. Related work reveals that annotators subjected to hate are more sensitive to labelling
something as offensive and advocate giving more voice to these collectives. This study analyses a new dataset for detecting racism in Spanish, focusing on solving a ground truth estimate given a few labels and high disagreement. Most annotators may not have previous experience with racism, as only three belong to the Black community. Our empirical results show better performance at lower thresholds for classifying messages as racist, which may be due to how annotators being permissive in identifying racist content propagates to the model. This analysis can be crucial for tailoring a general model to the specific needs of a particular individual or group. Especially in applications such as online abuse, detection models that reflect the viewpoint of crowdworkers may not be sufficient to detect all the intricacies of these social challenges.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/lobo2022estimating.pdf)

## Affinity Clustering Framework for Data Debiasing Using Pairwise Distribution Discrepancy
#### by _Siamak Ghodsi, Eirini Ntoutsi_
#### (European Workshop on Algorithmic Fairness 2023)
Group imbalance, resulting from inadequate or unrepresentative data collection methods, is a primary cause of representation bias in datasets. Representation bias can exist with respect to different groups of one or more protected attributes and might lead to prejudicial and discriminatory outcomes toward certain groups of individuals; in cases where a learning model is trained on such biased data. This paper presents MASC, a data augmentation approach that leverages affinity clustering to balance the representation of non-protected and protected groups of a target dataset by utilizing instances of the same protected attributes from similar datasets that are categorized in the same cluster as the target dataset by sharing instances of the protected attribute. The proposed method involves constructing an affinity matrix by quantifying distribution discrepancies between dataset pairs and transforming them into a symmetric pairwise similarity matrix. A non-parametric spectral clustering is then applied to this affinity matrix, automatically categorizing the datasets into an optimal number of clusters. We perform a step-by-step experiment as a demo of our method to show the procedure of the proposed data augmentation method and evaluate and discuss its performance. A comparison with other data augmentation methods, both pre- and post-augmentation, is conducted, along with a model evaluation analysis of each method. Our method can handle non-binary protected attributes so, in our experiments, bias is measured in a non-binary protected attribute setup w.r.t. racial groups distribution for two separate minority groups in comparison with the majority group before and after debiasing. Empirical results imply that our method of augmenting dataset biases using real (genuine) data from similar contexts can effectively debias the target datasets comparably to existing data augmentation strategies.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/ghodsi2023affinity.pdf)

## The Role of Large Language Models in the Recognition of Territorial Sovereignty: An Analysis of the Construction of Legitimacy
#### by _Francisco Castillo-Eslava, Carlos Mougan, Alejandro Romero-Reche, Steffen Staab_ 
#### (European Workshop on Algorithmic Fairness 2023)
We examine the potential impact of Large Language Models (LLM) on the recognition of territorial sovereignty and its legitimization. We argue that while technology tools, such as Google Maps and Large Language Models (LLM) like OpenAI's ChatGPT, are often perceived as impartial and objective, this perception is flawed, as AI algorithms reflect the biases of their designers or the data they are built on. We also stress the importance of evaluating the actions and decisions of AI and multinational companies that offer them, which play a crucial role in aspects such as legitimizing and establishing ideas in the collective imagination. Our paper highlights the case of three controversial territories: Crimea, West Bank and Transnitria, by comparing the responses of ChatGPT against Wikipedia information and United Nations resolutions. We contend that the emergence of AI-based tools like LLMs is leading to a new scenario in which emerging technology consolidates power and influences our understanding of reality. Therefore, it is crucial to monitor and analyze the role of AI in the construction of legitimacy and the recognition of territorial sovereignty.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/delobelle2022time.pdf)

## Context matters for fairness -- a case study on the effect of spatial distribution shifts
#### by _Siamak Ghodsi, Harith Alani, Eirini Ntoutsi_
#### (ArXiv Preprint 2022)
With the ever growing involvement of data-driven AI-based decision making technologies in our daily social lives, the fairness of these systems is becoming a crucial phenomenon. However, an important and often challenging aspect in utilizing such systems is to distinguish validity for the range of their application especially under distribution shifts, i.e., when a model is deployed on data with different distribution than the training set. In this paper, we present a case study on the newly released American Census datasets, a reconstruction of the popular Adult dataset, to illustrate the importance of context for fairness and show how remarkably can spatial distribution shifts affect predictive- and fairness-related performance of a model. The problem persists for fairness-aware learning models with the effects of context-specific fairness interventions differing across the states and different population groups. Our study suggests that robustness to distribution shifts is necessary before deploying a model to another context.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/ghodsi2022context.pdf)

## Sum of Group Error Differences: A Critical Examination of Bias Evaluation in Biometric Verification and a Dual-Metric Measure
#### by _Alaa Elobaid, Nathan Ramoly, Lara Younes, Symeon Papadopoulos, Eirini Ntoutsi, Ioannis Kompatsiaris_
#### (IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition 2024)
Biometric Verification (BV) systems often exhibit accuracy disparities across different demographic groups, leading to biases in BV applications. Assessing and quantifying these biases is essential for ensuring the fairness of BV systems. However, existing bias evaluation metrics in BV have limitations, such as focusing exclusively on match or non-match error rates, overlooking bias on demographic groups with performance levels falling between the best and worst performance levels, and neglecting the magnitude of the bias present.
This paper presents an in-depth analysis of the limitations of current bias evaluation metrics in BV and, through experimental analysis, demonstrates their contextual suitability, merits, and limitations. Additionally, it introduces a novel general-purpose bias evaluation measure for BV, the ``Sum of Group Error Differences (SEDG)''. Our experimental results on controlled synthetic datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of demographic bias quantification when using existing metrics and our own proposed measure. We discuss the applicability of the bias evaluation metrics in a set of simulated demographic bias scenarios and provide scenario-based metric recommendations. Our code is publicly available under https://github.com/alaaobeid/SEDG.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/elobaid2024group.pdf)

## Empowering machine learning models with contextual knowledge for enhancing the detection of eating disorders in social media posts
#### by _José Alberto Benítez-Andrades, María Teresa García-Ordás, Mayra Russo, Ahmad Sakor, Luis Daniel Fernandes Rotger, Maria-Esther Vidal_
#### (Semantic Web, Volume 14, Number 5, 2022)
Social networks have become information dissemination channels, where announcements are posted frequently; they also serve as frameworks for debates in various areas (e.g., scientific, political, and social). In particular, in the health area, social networks represent a channel to communicate and disseminate novel treatments’ success; they also allow ordinary people to express their concerns about a disease or disorder. The Artificial Intelligence (AI) community has developed analytical methods to uncover and predict patterns from posts that enable it to explain news about a particular topic, e.g., mental disorders expressed as eating disorders or depression. Albeit potentially rich while expressing an idea or concern, posts are presented as short texts, preventing, thus, AI models from accurately encoding these posts’ contextual knowledge. We propose a hybrid approach where knowledge encoded in community-maintained knowledge graphs (e.g., Wikidata) is combined with deep learning to categorize social media posts using existing classification models. The proposed approach resorts to state-of-the-art named entity recognizers and linkers (e.g., Falcon 2.0) to extract entities in short posts and link them to concepts in knowledge graphs. Then, knowledge graph embeddings (KGEs) are utilized to compute latent representations of the extracted entities, which result in vector representations of the posts that encode these entities’ contextual knowledge extracted from the knowledge graphs. These KGEs are combined with contextualized word embeddings (e.g., BERT) to generate a context-based representation of the posts that empower prediction models. We apply our proposed approach in the health domain to detect whether a publication is related to an eating disorder (e.g., anorexia or bulimia) and uncover concepts within the discourse that could help healthcare providers diagnose this type of mental disorder. We evaluate our approach on a dataset of 2,000 tweets about eating disorders. Our experimental results suggest that combining contextual knowledge encoded in word embeddings with the one built from knowledge graphs increases the reliability of the predictive models. The ambition is that the proposed method can support health domain experts in discovering patterns that may forecast a mental disorder, enhancing early detection and more precise diagnosis towards personalized medicine.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/andrades2022empowering.pdf)

## Bias-aware ranking from pairwise comparisons
#### by _Antonio Ferrara, Francesco Bonchi, Francesco Fabbri, Fariba Karimi, Claudia Wagner_
#### (Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, Volume 38, 2024)
Human feedback is often used, either directly or indirectly, as input to algorithmic decision making. However, humans are biased: if the algorithm that takes as input the human feedback does not control for potential biases, this might result in biased algorithmic decision making, which can have a tangible impact on people’s lives. In this paper, we study how to detect and correct for evaluators’ bias in the task of ranking people (or items) from pairwise comparisons. Specifically, we assume we are given pairwise comparisons of the items to be ranked produced by a set of evaluators. While the pairwise assessments of the evaluators should reflect to a certain extent the latent (unobservable) true quality scores of the items, they might be affected by each evaluator’s own bias against, or in favor, of some groups of items. By detecting and amending evaluators’ biases, we aim to produce a ranking of the items that is, as much as possible, in accordance with the ranking one would produce by having access to the latent quality scores. Our proposal is a novel method that extends the classic Bradley-Terry model by having a bias parameter for each evaluator which distorts the true quality score of each item, depending on the group the item belongs to. Thanks to the simplicity of the model, we are able to write explicitly its log-likelihood w.r.t. the parameters (i.e., items’ latent scores and evaluators’ bias) and optimize by means of the alternating approach. Our experiments on synthetic and real-world data confirm that our method is able to reconstruct the bias of each single evaluator extremely well and thus to outperform several non-trivial competitors in the task of producing a ranking which is as much as possible close to the unbiased ranking.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/ferrara2024bias.pdf)

## Towards Cohesion-Fairness Harmony: Contrastive Regularization in Individual Fair Graph Clustering
#### by _Siamak Ghodsi, Seyed Amjad Seyedi, Eirini Ntoutsi_
#### (Pacific-Asia Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 2024)
Conventional fair graph clustering methods face two primary challenges: i) They prioritize balanced clusters at the expense of cluster cohesion by imposing rigid constraints, ii) Existing methods of both individual and group-level fairness in graph partitioning mostly rely on eigen decompositions and thus, generally lack interpretability. To address these issues, we propose iFairNMTF, an individual Fairness Nonnegative Matrix Tri-Factorization model with contrastive fairness regularization that achieves balanced and cohesive clusters. By introducing fairness regularization, our model allows for customizable accuracy-fairness trade-offs, thereby enhancing user autonomy without compromising the interpretability provided by nonnegative matrix tri-factorization. Experimental evaluations on real and synthetic datasets demonstrate the superior flexibility of iFairNMTF in achieving fairness and clustering performance.
\
[Paper](https://github.com/nobias-project/Publications/blob/main/ghodsi2024cohesion.pdf)
